- [[#The default constructor|The default constructor]]
	- [[#The default constructor#Calling Overloaded Constructors with this()|Calling Overloaded Constructors with this()]]
	- [[#The default constructor#Calling Parent Constructors with _super()_|Calling Parent Constructors with _super()_]]
		- [[#Calling Parent Constructors with _super()_#Understanding Compiler Enhancements|Understanding Compiler Enhancements]]
		- [[#Calling Parent Constructors with _super()_#Default Constructor Tips and Tricks|Default Constructor Tips and Tricks]]
			- [[#Default Constructor Tips and Tricks#_super()_ Always Refers to the Most Direct Parent|_super()_ Always Refers to the Most Direct Parent]]
- [[#Initializing  Classes|Initializing  Classes]]
- [[#Initialize Class X|Initialize Class X]]
	- [[#Initialize Class X#Why the hippo program prints C after AB|Why the hippo program prints C after AB]]
- [[#Initializing _final_ Fields|Initializing _final_ Fields]]
	- [[#Initializing _final_ Fields#Initializing Instances|Initializing Instances]]
	- [[#Initializing _final_ Fields#Initialize Instance of X|Initialize Instance of X]]
- [[#Inheriting Members|Inheriting Members]]
	- [[#Inheriting Members#Overriding Method|Overriding Method]]
		- [[#Overriding Method#Rule 1: Method Signatures|Rule 1: Method Signatures]]
		- [[#Overriding Method#Rule 2: Access Modifiers|Rule 2: Access Modifiers]]
		- [[#Overriding Method#Rule 3: Checked Exceptions|Rule 3: Checked Exceptions]]
		- [[#Overriding Method#Rule 4: Covariant Return Types|Rule 4: Covariant Return Types]]
	- [[#Inheriting Members#Marking Methods with the _@Override_ Annotation|Marking Methods with the _@Override_ Annotation]]
	- [[#Inheriting Members#Redeclaring private methods|Redeclaring private methods]]
	- [[#Inheriting Members#Hiding Static Methods|Hiding Static Methods]]
	- [[#Inheriting Members#Writing _final_ Methods|Writing _final_ Methods]]
- [[#Introducing Abstract Classes|Introducing Abstract Classes]]
- [[#Creating Immutable Objects|Creating Immutable Objects]]
	- [[#Creating Immutable Objects#Declaring an Immutable Class|Declaring an Immutable Class]]
- [[#Summary|Summary]]
- [[#Exam Essentials|Exam Essentials]]





# Declaring constructor

## The default constructor

- Java created constructor is the default constructor

```java
public class Rabbit {
   public static void main(String[] args) {
      new Rabbit(); // Calls the default constructor
   }
}
```

In the `Rabbit` class, Java sees that no constructor was coded and creates one. The previous class is equivalent to the following, in which the default constructor is provided and therefore not inserted by the compiler:

```java
public class Rabbit {
   public Rabbit() {}
   public static void main(String[] args) {
      new Rabbit(); // Calls the user-defined constructor
   }
}
```

*For the exam, one of the most important rules you need to know is that the compiler only inserts the default constructor when no constructors are defined*

```java
public class Rabbit1 {}
 
public class Rabbit2 {
   public Rabbit2() {}
}
 
public class Rabbit3 {
   public Rabbit3(boolean b) {}
}
 
public class Rabbit4 {
   private Rabbit4() {}
}
```

Only `Rabbit1` gets a default no-argument constructor. It doesn't have a constructor coded, so Java generates a default no-argument constructor. `Rabbit2` and `Rabbit3` both have `public` constructors already. `Rabbit4` has a `private` constructor. Since these three classes have a constructor defined, the default no-argument constructor is not inserted for you.

Let's take a quick look at how to call these constructors:

### Calling Overloaded Constructors with this()

```java
public class Hamster {
   private String color;
   private int weight;
   public Hamster(int weight, String color) { // First constructor
      this.weight = weight;
      this.color = color;
   }
   public Hamster(int weight) { // Second constructor
      this.weight = weight;
      color = "brown";
   }
}
```

Java provides a solution: `this()`—yes, the same keyword we used to refer to instance members, but with parentheses. When `this()` is used with parentheses, Java calls another constructor on the same instance of the class.

```java
   public Hamster(int weight) {  // Second constructor
      this(weight, "brown");
   }
```

Success! Now Java calls the constructor that takes two parameters, with `weight` and `color` set as expected.

Despite using the same keyword, `this` and `this()` are very different. The first, `this`, refers to an instance of the class, while the second, `this()`, refers to a constructor call within the class. The exam may try to trick you by using both together, so make sure you know which one to use and why.

Calling `this()` has one special rule you need to know. If you choose to call it, the `this()` call must be the first statement in the constructor. The side effect of this is that there can be only one call to `this()` in any constructor.

```java
3:    public Hamster(int weight) {
4:       System.out.println("chew");
5:       // Set weight and default color
6:       this(weight, "brown");     // DOES NOT COMPILE
7:    }
```

There's one last rule for overloaded constructors that you should be aware of. Consider the following definition of the `Gopher` class:

```java
public class Gopher {
	// constructor call itself ♾️
   public Gopher(int dugHoles) {
      this(5);  // DOES NOT COMPILE
   }
}
```

Likewise, this also does not compile:

```java
// constuctor call each other ♾️
public class Gopher {
   public Gopher() {
      this(5);  // DOES NOT COMPILE
   }
   public Gopher(int dugHoles) {
      this();   // DOES NOT COMPILE
   }
}
```

In this example, the constructors call each other, and the process continues infinitely. Since the compiler can detect this, it reports an error.

Here we summarize the rules you should know about constructors that we covered in this section. Study them well!

- A class can contain many overloaded constructors, provided the signature for each is distinct.
- The compiler inserts a default no-argument constructor if no constructors are declared.
- If a constructor calls `this()`, then it must be the first line of the constructor.
- Java does not allow cyclic constructor calls.


### Calling Parent Constructors with _super()_


```java
public class Animal {
   private int age;
   public Animal(int age) {
      super(); // Refers to constructor in java.lang.Object
      this.age = age;
   }
}
 
public class Zebra extends Animal {
   public Zebra(int age) {
      super(age); // Refers to constructor in Animal
   }
   public Zebra() {
      this(4); // Refers to constructor in Zebra with int argument
   }
}
```
In the `Animal` class, the first statement of the constructor is a call to the parent constructor defined in `java.lang.Object`, which takes no arguments. In the second class, `Zebra`, the first statement of the first constructor is a call to `Animal`'s constructor, which takes a single argument. The `Zebra` class also includes a second no-argument constructor that doesn't call `super()` but instead calls the other constructor within the `Zebra` class using `this(4)`.

*Like calling `this()`, calling `super()` can only be used as the first statement of the constructor. For example, the following two class definitions will not compile: *

```java
public class Zoo {
   public Zoo() {
      System.out.println("Zoo created");
      super();      // DOES NOT COMPILE
   }
}
 
public class Zoo {
   public Zoo() {
      super();
      System.out.println("Zoo created");
      super();      // DOES NOT COMPILE
   }
}
```

<hr>

If the parent class has more than one constructor, the child class may use any valid parent constructor in its definition, as shown in the following example:

```java
public class Animal {
   private int age;
   private String name;
   public Animal(int age, String name) {
      super();
      this.age = age;
      this.name = name;
   }
   public Animal(int age) {
      super();
      this.age = age;
      this.name = null;
   }
}
 
public class Gorilla extends Animal {
   public Gorilla(int age) {
      super(age,"Gorilla");  // Calls the first Animal constructor
   }
   public Gorilla() {
      super(5);              // Calls the second Animal constructor
   }
}
```

#### Understanding Compiler Enhancements

Wait a second: we said the first line of every constructor is a call to either `this()` or `super()`, but we've been creating classes and constructors throughout this book, and we've rarely done either. How did these classes compile?

The answer is that the Java compiler automatically inserts a call to the no-argument constructor `super()` if you do not explicitly call `this()` or `super()` as the first line of a constructor. For example, the following three class and constructor definitions are equivalent, because the compiler will automatically convert them all to the last example:

```java
public class Donkey {}
 
public class Donkey {
   public Donkey() {}
}
 
public class Donkey {
   public Donkey() {
      super();
   }
}
```

Make sure you understand the differences between these three `Donkey` class definitions and why Java will automatically convert them all to the last definition. While reading the next section, keep in mind the process the Java compiler performs.

#### Default Constructor Tips and Tricks

We've presented a lot of rules so far, and you might have noticed something. Let's say we have a class that doesn't include a no-argument constructor. What happens if we define a subclass with no constructors, or a subclass with a constructor that doesn't include a `super()` reference?

```java
public class Mammal {
   public Mammal(int age) {}
}
 
public class Seal extends Mammal {}  // DOES NOT COMPILE
 
public class Elephant extends Mammal {
   public Elephant() {}             // DOES NOT COMPILE
}
```

In these cases, the compiler will not help, and you _must_ create at least one constructor in your child class that explicitly calls a parent constructor via the `super()` command.

```java
public class Seal extends Mammal {
   public Seal() {
      super(6); // Explicit call to parent constructor
   }
}
 
public class Elephant extends Mammal {
   public Elephant() {
      super(4); // Explicit call to parent constructor
   }
}
```

##### _super()_ Always Refers to the Most Direct Parent

A class may have multiple ancestors via inheritance. In our previous example, `AfricanElephant` is a subclass of `Elephant`, which in turn is a subclass of `Mammal`. For constructors, though, `super()` always refers to the most direct parent. In this example, calling `super()` inside the `AfricanElephant` class always refers to the `Elephant` class and never to the `Mammal` class.

We conclude this section by adding three constructor rules to your skill set:

- The first line of every constructor is a call to a parent constructor using `super()` or an overloaded constructor using `this()`.
- If the constructor does not contain a `this()` or `super()` reference, then the compiler automatically inserts `super()` with no arguments as the first line of the constructor.
- If a constructor calls `super()`, then it must be the first line of the constructor.

Congratulations: you've learned everything we can teach you about declaring constructors. Next, we move on to initialization and discuss how to use constructors.

# Initializing Objects

## Initializing  Classes 

Class initialization in Java begins with the JVM loading all static members across the class hierarchy, starting from the highest superclass and moving downward. This process, often called "loading the class," happens only once for each class and only when the class is actually needed. This initialization can occur when the program starts, when a static member is accessed, or just before an instance of the class is created. If a class is never used, it may not be loaded at all.

## Initialize Class X

1. If there is a superclass Y of X, then initialize class Y first.
2. Process all `static` variable declarations in the order in which they appear in the class.
3. Process all `static` initializers in the order in which they appear in the class.

Taking a look at an example, what does the following program print?

```java
public class Animal {
   static { System.out.print("A"); }
}
 
public class Hippo extends Animal {
   public static void main(String[] grass) {
      System.out.print("C");
      new Hippo();
      new Hippo();
      new Hippo();
   }
   static { System.out.print("B"); }
}
```

It prints `ABC` exactly once. Since the `main()` method is inside the `Hippo` class, the class will be initialized first, starting with the superclass and printing `AB`. Afterward, the `main()` method is executed, printing `C`. Even though the `main()` method creates three instances, the class is loaded only once.

### Why the hippo program prints C after AB

In the previous example, the `Hippo` class was initialized before the `main()` method was executed. This happened because our `main()` method was inside the class being executed, so it had to be loaded on startup. What if you instead called `Hippo` inside another program?

```java
public class HippoFriend {
   public static void main(String[] grass) {
      System.out.print("C");
      new Hippo();
   }
}
```

Assuming the class isn't referenced anywhere else, this program will likely print `CAB`, with the `Hippo` class not being loaded until it is needed inside the `main()` method. We say _likely_ because the rules for when classes are loaded are determined by the JVM at runtime. For the exam, you just need to know that a class must be initialized before it is referenced or used. Also, the class containing the program entry point, aka the `main()` method, is loaded before the `main()` method is executed.



## Initializing _final_ Fields

### Initializing Instances

We've covered class initialization and `final` fields, so now it's time to move on to order of initialization for objects. We'll warn you that this can be a bit cumbersome at first, but the exam isn't likely to ask questions more complicated than the examples in this section. We promise to take it slowly, though.

First, start at the lowest-level constructor where the `new` keyword is used. Remember, the first line of every constructor is a call to `this()` or `super()`, and if omitted, the compiler will automatically insert a call to the parent no-argument constructor `super()`. Then, progress upward and note the order of constructors. Finally, initialize each class starting with the superclass, processing each instance initializer and constructor in the reverse order in which it was called. We summarize the order of initialization for an instance as follows:


### Initialize Instance of X

1. Initialize class X if it has not been previously initialized.
2. If there is a superclass Y of X, then initialize the instance of Y first.
3. Process all instance variable declarations in the order in which they appear in the class.
4. Process all instance initializers in the order in which they appear in the class.
5. Initialize the constructor, including any overloaded constructors referenced with `this()`.

Let's try an example with no inheritance. See if you can figure out what the following application outputs:
```java
1:  public class ZooTickets {
2:     private String name = "BestZoo";
3:     { System.out.print(name + "-"); }
4:     private static int COUNT = 0;
5:     static { System.out.print(COUNT + "-"); }
6:     static { COUNT += 10; System.out.print(COUNT + "-"); }
7:
8:     public ZooTickets() {
9:        System.out.print("z-");
10:    }
11:
12:    public static void main(String… patrons) {
13:       new ZooTickets();
14:    } }
```

## Inheriting Members

Now that we've created a class, what can we do with it? One of Java's biggest strengths is leveraging its inheritance model to simplify code.

### Overriding Method

When a method with the same signature exists in both a parent and child class, the child class can override the method to provide a new implementation specific to that subclass. Overriding in Java occurs when the child class redefines an inherited method with the same name, parameters, and a compatible return type.

**Key Point**: A method's signature includes only its name and parameters, **not** the return type, access modifiers, specifiers, or exceptions.

```java
public class Marsupial {
   public double getAverageWeight() {
      return 50;
   }
}
public class Kangaroo extends Marsupial {
   public double getAverageWeight() {
      return super.getAverageWeight()+20;
   }
   public static void main(String[] args) {
      System.out.println(new Marsupial().getAverageWeight());  // 50.0
      System.out.println(new Kangaroo().getAverageWeight());   // 70.0
   }
}
```

In this example, the `Kangaroo` class overrides the `getAverageWeight()` method but in the process calls the parent version using the `super` reference.


#### Rule 1: Method Signatures

The first rule of overriding a method is somewhat self-explanatory. If two methods have the same name but different signatures, the methods are overloaded, not overridden. Overloaded methods are considered independent and do not share the same polymorphic properties as overridden methods.

#### Rule 2: Access Modifiers

```java
public class Camel {
   public int getNumberOfHumps() {
      return 1;
   } }
 
public class BactrianCamel extends Camel {
   private int getNumberOfHumps() { // DOES NOT COMPILE
      return 2;
   } }
```

In this example, `BactrianCamel` attempts to override the `getNumberOfHumps()` method defined in the parent class but fails because the access modifier `private` is more restrictive than the one defined in the parent version of the method. Let's say `BactrianCamel` was allowed to compile, though. Would this class compile?

Let's assume we compile 

```java
public class Rider {
   public static void main(String[] args) {
      Camel c = new BactrianCamel();
      System.out.print(c.getNumberOfHumps()); // ???
   } }
```

The answer is, we don't know. The reference type for the object is `Camel`, where the method is declared `public`, but the object is actually an instance of type `BactrianCamel`, where the method is declared `private`. Java avoids these types of ambiguity problems by limiting overriding a method to access modifiers that are as accessible or more accessible than the version in the inherited method.

#### Rule 3: Checked Exceptions

The third rule says that overriding a method cannot declare new checked exceptions or checked exceptions broader than the inherited method. This is done for polymorphic reasons similar to limiting access modifiers. In other words, you could end up with an object that is more restrictive than the reference type it is assigned to, resulting in a checked exception that is not handled or declared. One implication of this rule is that overridden methods are free to declare any number of new unchecked exceptions.

example :
```java
public class Reptile {
   protected void sleep() throws IOException {}
 
   protected void hide() {}
 
   protected void exitShell() throws FileNotFoundException {}
}
 
public class GalapagosTortoise extends Reptile {
   public void sleep() throws FileNotFoundException {}
 
   public void hide() throws FileNotFoundException {} // DOES NOT COMPILE
 
 
   public void exitShell() throws IOException {} // DOES NOT COMPILE
}
```

In this example, we have three overridden methods. These overridden methods use the more accessible `public` modifier, which is allowed per our second rule for overridden methods. The first overridden method `sleep()` in `GalapagosTortoise` compiles without issue because the declared exception is narrower than the exception declared in the parent class.

The overridden `hide()` method does not compile because it declares a new checked exception not present in the parent declaration. The overridden `exitShell()` also does not compile, since `IOException` is a broader checked exception than `FileNotFoundException`. We revisit these exception classes, including memorizing which ones are subclasses of each other, in [[12. Chapter 11  Exceptions and Localization]]

#### Rule 4: Covariant Return Types


The fourth and final rule around overriding a method is probably the most complicated, as it requires knowing the relationships between the return types. The overriding method must use a return type that is covariant with the return type of the inherited method.

Let's try an example for illustrative purposes:

```java
public class Rhino {
   protected CharSequence getName() {
      return "rhino";
   }
   protected String getColor() {
      return "grey, black, or white";
   } }
 
public class JavanRhino extends Rhino {
   public String getName() {
      return "javan rhino";
   }
   public CharSequence getColor() { // DOES NOT COMPILE
      return "grey";
   } }
```

### Marking Methods with the _@Override_ Annotation

An annotation is a metadata tag that provides additional information about your code. You can use the @Override annotation to tell the compiler that you are attempting to override a method.

```java
public class Fish {
   public void swim() {};
}
public class Shark extends Fish {
   @Override
   public void swim() {};
}
```

When used correctly, the annotation doesn't impact the code. On the other hand, when used incorrectly, this annotation can prevent you from making a mistake. The following does not compile because of the presence of the `@Override` annotation:

```java
public class Fish {
   public void swim() {};
}
public class Shark extends Fish {
   @Override
   public void swim(int speed) {}; // DOES NOT COMPILE
}
```

### Redeclaring private methods


```java
public class Beetle {
   private String getSize() {
      return "Undefined";
   } }
 
public class RhinocerosBeetle extends Beetle {
   private int getSize() {
      return 5;
   } }
```

Notice that the return type differs in the child method from `String` to `int`. In this example, the method `getSize()` in the parent class is redeclared, so the method in the child class is a new method and not an override of the method in the parent class.

What if `getSize()` method was declared `public` in `Beetle`? In this case, the method in `RhinocerosBeetle` would be an invalid override. The access modifier in `RhinocerosBeetle` is more restrictive, and the return types are not covariant.
### Hiding Static Methods

A `static` method cannot be overridden because class objects do not inherit from each other in the same way as instance objects. On the other hand, they can be hidden. A _hidden method_ occurs when a child class defines a `static` method with the same name and signature as an inherited `static` method defined in a parent class. Method hiding is similar to but not exactly the same as method overriding. The previous four rules for overriding a method must be followed when a method is hidden. In addition, a new fifth rule is added for hiding a method:

- The method defined in the child class must be marked as `static` if it is marked as `static` in a parent class.

Put simply, it is method hiding if the two methods are marked `static` and method overriding if they are not marked `static`. If one is marked `static` and the other is not, the class will not compile.

Let's review some examples of the new rule:

See if you can figure out why each of the method declarations in the `SunBear` class does not compile:

```java
See if you can figure out why each of the method declarations in the SunBear class does not compile:

public class Bear {
   public static void sneeze() {
      System.out.println("Bear is sneezing");
   }
   public void hibernate() {
      System.out.println("Bear is hibernating");
   }
   public static void laugh() {
      System.out.println("Bear is laughing");
   }
}
 
public class SunBear extends Bear {
   public void sneeze() {             // DOES NOT COMPILE
      System.out.println("Sun Bear sneezes quietly");
   }
   public static void hibernate() {   // DOES NOT COMPILE
      System.out.println("Sun Bear is going to sleep");
   }
   protected static void laugh() {    // DOES NOT COMPILE
      System.out.println("Sun Bear is laughing");
   }
}
```

```java
class Carnivore {
   protected boolean hasFur = false;
}
 
public class Meerkat extends Carnivore {
   protected boolean hasFur = true;
 
   public static void main(String[] args) {
      Meerkat m = new Meerkat();
      Carnivore c = m;
      System.out.println(m.hasFur); // true
      System.out.println(c.hasFur); // false
   }
}
```
### Writing _final_ Methods

We conclude our discussion of method inheritance with a somewhat self-explanatory rule: *`final` methods cannot be overridden*. By marking a method `final`, you forbid a child class from replacing this method. This rule is in place both when you override a method and when you hide a method. In other words, you cannot hide a `static` method in a child class if it is marked `final` in the parent class.

Let's take a look at an example:

```java
public class Bird {
   public final boolean hasFeathers() {
      return true;
   }
   public final static void flyAway() {}
}
 
public class Penguin extends Bird {
   public final boolean hasFeathers() {   // DOES NOT COMPILE
      return false;
   }
   public final static void flyAway() {}  // DOES NOT COMPILE
}
```

# Creating Abstract class

## Introducing Abstract Classes

Enter abstract classes. An _abstract class_ is a class declared with the `abstract` modifier that cannot be instantiated directly and may contain abstract methods. Let's take a look at an example based on the `Canine` data model:

```java
public abstract class Canine {}
 
public class Wolf extends Canine {}
 
public class Fox extends Canine {}
 
public class Coyote extends Canine {}
```

Abstract method incompatible with 
- final
- static
- private 
```java
abstract class Hippopotamus {
   abstract static void swim(); // DOES NOT COMPILE
   abstract final void swim(); // DOES NOT COMPILE
   private abstract void swim(); // DOES NOT COMPILE
}
```

## Creating Immutable Objects

### Declaring an Immutable Class

Although there are a variety of techniques for writing an immutable class, you should be familiar with a common strategy for making a class immutable:

1. Mark the class as `final` or make all of the constructors `private`.
2. Mark all the instance variables `private` and `final`.
3. Don't define any setter methods.
4. Don't allow referenced mutable objects to be modified.
5. Use a constructor to set all properties of the object, making a copy if needed.
## Summary

This chapter took the basic class structures we've presented throughout the book and expanded them by introducing the notion of inheritance. Java classes follow a single-inheritance pattern in which every class has exactly one direct parent class, with all classes eventually inheriting from `java.lang.Object`.

Inheriting a class gives you access to all of the `public` and `protected` members of the class. It also gives you access to package members of the class if the classes are in the same package. All instance methods, constructors, and instance initializers have access to two special reference variables: `this` and `super`. Both `this` and `super` provide access to all inherited members, with only `this` providing access to all members in the current class declaration.

Constructors are special methods that use the class name and do not have a return type. They are used to instantiate new objects. Declaring constructors requires following a number of important rules. If no constructor is provided, the compiler will automatically insert a default no-argument constructor in the class. The first line of every constructor is a call to an overloaded constructor, `this()`, or a parent constructor, `super()`; otherwise, the compiler will insert a call to `super()` as the first line of the constructor. In some cases, such as if the parent class does not define a no-argument constructor, this can lead to compilation errors. Pay close attention on the exam to any class that defines a constructor with arguments and doesn't define a no-argument constructor.

Classes are initialized in a predetermined order: superclass initialization; `static` variables and `static` initializers in the order that they appear; instance variables and instance initializers in the order they appear; and finally, the constructor. All `final` instance variables must be assigned a value exactly once.

We reviewed overloaded, overridden, hidden, and redeclared methods and showed how they differ. A method is overloaded if it has the same name but a different signature as another accessible method. A method is overridden if it has the same signature as an inherited method, with access modifiers, exceptions, and a return type that are compatible. A `static` method is hidden if it has the same signature as an inherited `static` method. Finally, a method is redeclared if it has the same name and possibly the same signature as an uninherited method.

We then moved on to abstract classes, which are just like regular classes except that they cannot be instantiated and may contain abstract methods. An abstract class can extend a non-abstract class and vice versa. Abstract classes can be used to define a framework that other developers write subclasses against. An abstract method is one that does not include a body when it is declared. An abstract method can only be placed inside an abstract class or interface. Next, an abstract method can be overridden with another abstract declaration or a concrete implementation, provided the rules for overriding methods are followed. The first concrete class must implement all of the inherited abstract methods, whether they are inherited from an abstract class or an interface.

Finally, this chapter showed you how to create immutable objects in Java. Although there are a number of different techniques to do so, we included the most common one you should know for the exam. Immutable objects are extremely useful in practice, especially in multi-threaded applications, since they do not change.

## Exam Essentials

**Be able to write code that extends other classes.** A Java class that extends another class inherits all of its `public` and `protected` methods and variables. If the class is in the same package, it also inherits all package members of the class. Classes that are marked `final` cannot be extended. Finally, all classes in Java extend `java.lang.Object` either directly or from a superclass.

**Be able to distinguish and use _**this**_, _**this()**_, _**super**_, and _**super()**_.** To access a current or inherited member of a class, the `this` reference can be used. To access an inherited member, the `super` reference can be used. The `super` reference is often used to reduce ambiguity, such as when a class reuses the name of an inherited method or variable. The calls to `this()` and `super()` are used to access constructors in the same class and parent class, respectively.

**Evaluate code involving constructors.** The first line of every constructor is a call to another constructor within the class using `this()` or a call to a constructor of the parent class using the `super()` call. The compiler will insert a call to `super()` if no constructor call is declared. If the parent class doesn't contain a no-argument constructor, an explicit call to the parent constructor must be provided. Be able to recognize when the default constructor is provided. Remember that the order of initialization is to initialize all classes in the class hierarchy, starting with the superclass. Then the instances are initialized, again starting with the superclass. All `final` variables must be assigned a value exactly once by the time the constructor is finished.

**Understand the rules for method overriding.** Java allows methods to be overridden, or replaced, by a subclass if certain rules are followed: a method must have the same signature, be at least as accessible as the parent method, must not declare any new or broader exceptions, and must use covariant return types. Methods marked `final` may not be overridden or hidden.

**Recognize the difference between method overriding and method overloading.** Both method overloading and overriding involve creating a new method with the same name as an existing method. When the method signature is the same, it is referred to as method overriding and must follow a specific set of override rules to compile. When the method signature is different, with the method taking different inputs, it is referred to as method overloading, and none of the override rules are required. Method overriding is important to polymorphism because it replaces all calls to the method, even those made in a superclass.

**Understand the rules for hiding methods and variables.** When a `static` method is overridden in a subclass, it is referred to as method hiding. Likewise, variable hiding is when an inherited variable name is reused in a subclass. In both situations, the original method or variable still exists and is accessible depending on where it is accessed and the reference type used. For method hiding, the use of `static` in the method declaration must be the same between the parent and child class. Finally, variable and method hiding should generally be avoided since it leads to confusing and difficult-to-follow code.

**Be able to write code that creates and extends abstract classes.** In Java, classes and methods can be declared as `abstract`. An abstract class cannot be instantiated. An instance of an abstract class can be obtained only through a concrete subclass. Abstract classes can include any number of abstract and non-abstract methods, including zero. Abstract methods follow all the method override rules and may be defined only within abstract classes. The first concrete subclass of an abstract class must implement all the inherited methods. Abstract classes and methods may not be marked as `final`.

**Create immutable objects.** An immutable object is one that cannot be modified after it is declared. An immutable class is commonly implemented with a `private` constructor, no setter methods, and no ability to modify mutable objects contained within the class.