- Vagrant’s ideal workflow allows developers to use existing browsers and development tools on their local machine.
- Shared folders sync files between the host and guest machines, enabling the use of local editors.
- Vagrant provides three networking options: forwarded ports, host-only networking, and bridged networking, each with its specific use case, benefits, and downsides.
- The chapter focuses on configuring Apache on a virtual machine, reviewing the networking options to see how they work and their associated pros and cons.


## Foward Port 

### Pros of Forwarded Ports:
- Simple to set up by specifying ports in the Vagrantfile.
- Ideal for basic web services and quick access.

### Cons of Forwarded Ports:
- Requires explicit configuration for each port, making it tedious for multiple services or databases.
- Ports are accessible from outside the local machine, potentially raising security and privacy concerns.
- Cannot forward ports below 1024 (e.g., SSL on port 443) due to limitations with VirtualBox and operating system restrictions.

#### Basic Usage:
- Forward ports are configured in the Vagrantfile using `config.vm.forwarded_port` to map guest ports to host ports.
- Multiple ports can be forwarded by adding multiple definitions, but changes take effect only after running `vagrant reload`.

### Collision Detection and Correction

Vagrant detects port collisions when a forwarded port conflicts with an already used port on your system. By default, it reports an error, allowing you to resolve the issue manually by either freeing the port or changing the port in the Vagrantfile. You can enable auto-correction, which allows Vagrant to automatically choose another unused port, by adding the `auto_correct: true` option to the forwarded port definition. The default auto-correction range is between ports 2200 and 2250, but this range can be customized using `config.vm.usable_port_range`.

### TCP versus UDP

By default, forwarded ports in Vagrant only support TCP connections. To forward UDP packets, you need to configure an additional forwarded port with the `protocol: "udp"` option. If both TCP and UDP are required, two separate forwarded port declarations must be used.

```ruby
config.vm.forwarded_port 80, 8080, protocol: "udp"
```
## Host only network



